---
tags:
  - linux/disk/raid
  - linux/disk/partitioning
---

## What I Did Today (summary)

Checked the feasibility of creating a RAID-1 between an existing disk `sdb` and a new disk, as `sdb` already has data in it, so I needed a way to do it without losing data in `sdb`.

After some research I found out that I needed to create a degraded RAID-1 using `mdadam` and adding the new disk `sdc` into it, once the RAID-1 is created I need to copy the data from `sdb` into the RAID, finally the only thing left to do is add the `sdb` disk into the RAID, wait until sync is completed and done.


---

## What I Did Today (techical)

> OS Used: Debian 12.10 inside a VirtualBox machine.
> Old disk is treated as `/dev/sdb` with only 1 partition.
> New disk is treated as `/dev/sdc` with only 1 partition.


**Prerequisites**

1. To create the RAID-1 volume we need the tool `mdadm`. Can be installed with `apt install mdadm`.
2. The new disk needs to be partitioned.
	1. Run `fdisk /dev/sdc`
	2. Press `n` to create new partition.
	3. Press `Enter` to use the defaults, it will create a partition which uses whole disk.
	4. Press `w` to confirm changes.
	5. Run `mkfs.ext4 /dev/sdc1`.


**Steps**

- Create new RAID-1 volume, use the *NEW DISK*:

```bash
mdadm --create /dev/md0 --level=1 --raid-devices=2 missing /dev/sdc1 --metadata=0.90
```

> NOTE: If we want to create a RAID using both disks we can run the following comand:
> mdadm --create /dev/md0 --level=1 --raid-devices=2 /dev/sdb1 /dev/sdc1 --metadata=0.90

From now on `/dev/md0` will be our RAID volume.

- Format new RAID volume with:

```bash
mkfs.ext4 /dev/md0
```

- Mount RAID volume (desintation folder must exist) with:

```bash
mount /dev/md0 /mnt/raid
```

- Copy old data from wherever `sdb` is mounted into `/mnt/raid/` using:

```bash
cp -R <source> /mnt/raid/
```

- Once finished, add `sdb` into RAID-1 with the command:

```bash
mdadm /dev/md0 --add /dev/sdb1
```

- Check status of sync with:

```bash
mdadm --detail /dev/md0
cat /proc/mdstat
```

With this our RAID-1 will be up and running, now we need to make sure it is still available after every reboot.

To do that we need to add the current RAID-1 volume to the configuration:

```bash
mdadm --detail --scan >> /etc/mdadm/mdadm.conf
update-initramfs -u
```

Now we have to update our `fstab`, first of all run `blkid /dev/md0` and copy the UUID of the RAID volume. Then using that UUID we add the following entry into `/etc/fstab`:

```
UUID=<uuid>  /mnt/raid  ext4  defaults  0 2
```

Check configuration with:

```bash
systemctl daemon-reload
mount -a
```

After rebooting we see that the RAID volume is still up and running.
